GARDEN CITY PUBLISHING CO., INC.
COPYRIGHT, 1917
BY
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY
GENERAL EDITOR'S PREFACE
Statesmen--even the greatest--have rarely won the same unquestioning
recognition that falls to the great warriors or those supreme in science, art
or literature. Not in their own lifetime and hardly to this day have the
claims to supremacy of our own Oliver Cromwell, William III. and Lord
Chatham rested on so sure a foundation as those of a Marlborough or a
Nelson, a Newton, a Milton or a Hogarth. This is only natural. A warrior, a
man of science, an artist or a poet are judged in the main by definite
achievements, by the victories they have won over foreign enemies or over
ignorance and prejudice, by the joy and enlightenment they have brought to
the consciousness of their own and succeeding generations. For the
statesman there is no such exact measure of greatness. The greater he is, the
less likely is his work to be marked by decisive achievement which can be
recalled by anniversaries or signalised by some outstanding event: the chief
work of a great statesman rests in a gradual change of direction given to the
policy of his people, still more in a change of the spirit within them. Again,
the statesman must work with a rough and ready instrument. The soldier
finds or makes his army ready to yield unhesitating obedience to his
commands, the sailor animates his fleet with his own personal touch, and
the great man in art, literature or science is master of his material, if he can
master himself. The statesman cannot mould a heterogeneous people, as the
men of a well-disciplined army or navy can be moulded, to respond to his
call and his alone. He has to do all his work in a society of which a large
part cannot see his object and another large part, as far as they do see it,
oppose it. Hence his work at the best is often incomplete and he has to be
satisfied with a rough average rather than with his ideal.
Abraham Lincoln 3
Lincoln, one of the few supreme statesmen of the last three centuries, was
no exception to this rule. He was misunderstood and underrated in his
lifetime, and even yet has hardly come to his own. For his place is among
the great men of the earth. To them he belongs by right of his immense
power of hard work, his unfaltering pursuit of what seemed to him right,
and above all by that childlike directness and simplicity of vision which
none but the greatest carry beyond their earliest years. It is fit that the first
considered attempt by an Englishman to give a picture of Lincoln, the great
hero of America's struggle for the noblest cause, should come at a time
when we in England are passing through as fiery a trial for a cause we feel
to be as noble. It is a time when we may learn much from Lincoln's failures
and success, from his patience, his modesty, his serene optimism and his
eloquence, so simple and so magnificent.
BASIL WILLIAMS.
BISCOT CAMP,
LUTON,
March, 1916.
CONTENTS
GENERAL EDITOR'S PREFACE
CHAP.
I. BOYHOOD OF LINCOLN
II. THE GROWTH OF THE AMERICAN NATION 1. The Formation of a
National Government 2. Territorial Expansion 3. The Growth of the
Practice and Traditions of the Union Government 4. The Missouri
Compromise 5. Leaders, Parties, and Tendencies in Lincoln's Youth 6.
Slavery and Southern Society 7. Intellectual Development
Abraham Lincoln 4
III. LINCOLN'S EARLY CAREER 1. Life at New Salem 2. In the Illinois
Legislature 3. Marriage
IV. LINCOLN IN CONGRESS AND IN RETIREMENT 1. The Mexican
War and Lincoln's Work in Congress 2. California and the Compromise of
1850 3. Lincoln in Retirement 4. The Repeal of the Missouri Compromise
V. THE RISE OF LINCOLN 1. Lincoln's Return to Public Life 2. The
Principles and the Oratory of Lincoln 3. Lincoln against Douglas 4. John
Brown 5. The Election of Lincoln as President
VI. SECESSION 1. The Case of the South against the Union 2. The
Progress of Secession 3. The Inauguration of Lincoln 4. The Outbreak of
War
VII. THE CONDITIONS OF THE WAR
VIII. THE OPENING OF THE WAR AND LINCOLN'S
ADMINISTRATION 1. Preliminary Stages of the War 2. Bull Run 3.
Lincoln's Administration Generally 4. Foreign Policy and England 5. The
Great Questions of Domestic Policy
IX. THE DISASTERS OF THE NORTH 1. Military Policy of the North 2.
The War in the West up to May, 1862 3. The War in the East up to May,
1863
X. EMANCIPATION
XI. THE APPROACH OF VICTORY 1. The War to the End of 1863 2.
Conscription and the Politics of 1863 3. The War in 1864 4. The Second
Election of Lincoln: 1864
XII. THE END
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
Abraham Lincoln 5
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE
INDEX
ABRAHAM LINCOLN
CHAPTER I
BOYHOOD OF LINCOLN
The subject of this memoir is revered by multitudes of his countrymen as
the preserver of their commonwealth. This reverence has grown with the
lapse of time and the accumulation of evidence. It is blended with a
peculiar affection, seldom bestowed upon the memory of statesmen. It is
shared to-day by many who remember with no less affection how their own
fathers fought against him. He died with every circumstance of tragedy, yet
it is not the accident of his death but the purpose of his life that is
remembered.
Readers of history in another country cannot doubt that the praise so given
is rightly given; yet any bare record of the American Civil War may leave
them wondering why it has been so unquestioningly accorded. The position
and task of the American President in that crisis cannot be understood from
those of other historic rulers or historic leaders of a people; and it may
seem as if, after that tremendous conflict in which there was no lack of
heroes, some perverse whim had made men single out for glory the puzzled
civil magistrate who sat by. Thus when an English writer tells again this
tale, which has been well told already and in which there can remain no
important new facts to disclose, he must endeavour to make clear to
Englishmen circumstances and conditions which are familiar to Americans.
He will incur the certainty that here and there his own perspective of
American affairs and persons will be false, or his own touch unsympathetic.
He had better do this than chronicle sayings and doings which to him and to
those for whom he writes have no significance. Nor should the writer
shrink too timidly from the display of a partisanship which, on one side or
CHAPTER I 6
the other, it would be insensate not to feel. The true obligation of
impartiality is that he should conceal no fact which, in his own mind, tells
against his views.
Abraham Lincoln, sixteenth President of the United States of America, was
born on February 12, 1809, in a log cabin on a barren farm in the
backwoods of Kentucky, about three miles west of a place called
Hodgensville in what is now La Rue County.
Fifty years later when he had been nominated for the Presidency he was
asked for material for an account of his early life. "Why," he said, "it is a
great folly to attempt to make anything out of me or my early life. It can all
be condensed into a single sentence; and that sentence you will find in
Gray's 'Elegy':--
"'The short and simple annals of the poor.'
That's my life, and that's all you or anyone else can make out of it." His
other references to early days were rare. He would repeat queer
reminiscences of the backwoods to illustrate questions of state; but of his
own part in that old life he spoke reluctantly and sadly. Nevertheless there
was once extracted from him an awkward autobiographical fragment, and
his friends have collected and recorded concerning his earlier years quite as
much as is common in great men's biographies or can as a rule be
reproduced with its true associations. Thus there are tales enough of the
untaught student's perseverance, and of the boy giant's gentleness and
prowess; tales, too, more than enough in proportion, of the fun which
varied but did not pervade his existence, and of the young rustic's
occasional and somewhat oafish pranks. But, in any conception we may
form as to the growth of his mind and character, this fact must have its
place, that to the man himself the thought of his early life was unattractive,
void of self-content over the difficulties which he had conquered, and void
of romantic fondness for vanished joys of youth.
Much the same may be said of his ancestry and family connections.
Contempt for lowly beginnings, abhorrent as it is to any honest mind,
CHAPTER I 7
would to Lincoln's mind have probably been inconceivable, but he lacked
that interest in ancestry which is generally marked in his countrymen, and
from talk of his nearer progenitors he seems to have shrunk with a positive
sadness of which some causes will soon be apparent. Since his death it has
been ascertained that in 1638 one Samuel Lincoln of Norwich emigrated to
Massachusetts. Descent from him could be claimed by a prosperous family
in Virginia, several of whom fought on the Southern side in the Civil War.
One Abraham Lincoln, grandfather of the President and apparently a
grandson of Samuel, crossed the mountains from Virginia in 1780 and
settled his family in Kentucky, of which the nearer portions had recently
been explored. One morning four years later he was at work near his cabin
with Mordecai, Josiah, and Thomas, his sons, when a shot from the bushes
near by brought him down. Mordecai ran to the house, Josiah to a fort,
which was close to them. Thomas, aged six, stayed by his father's body.
Mordecai seized a gun and, looking through the window, saw an Indian in
war paint stooping to pick up Thomas. He fired and killed the savage, and,
when Thomas had run into the cabin, continued firing at others who
appeared among the bushes. Shortly Josiah returned with soldiers from the
fort, and the Indians ran off, leaving Abraham the elder dead. Mordecai, his
heir-at-law, prospered. We hear of him long after as an old man of
substance and repute in Western Illinois. He had decided views about
Indians. The sight of a redskin would move him to strange excitement; he
would disappear into the bushes with his gun, and his conscience as a son
and a sportsman would not be satisfied till he had stalked and shot him. We
are further informed that he was a "good old man." Josiah also moved to
Illinois, and it is pleasant to learn that he also was a good old man, and, as
became a good old man, prospered pretty well. But President Lincoln and
his sister knew neither these excellent elders nor any other of their father's
kin.
And those with whom the story of his own first twenty-one years is bound
up invite almost as summary treatment. Thomas Lincoln never prospered
like Mordecai and Josiah, and never seems to have left the impress of his
goodness or of anything else on any man. But, while learning to carpenter
under one Joseph Hanks, he married his employer's niece Nancy, and by
her became the father first of a daughter Sarah, and four years later, at the
CHAPTER I 8
farm near Hodgensville aforesaid, of Abraham, the future President. In
1816, after several migrations, he transported his household down the Ohio
to a spot on the Indiana shore, near which the village of Gentryville soon
sprang up. There he abode till Abraham was nearly twenty-one. When the
boy was eight his mother died, leaving him in his sister's care; but after a
year or so Thomas went back alone to Kentucky and, after brief wooing,
brought back a wife, Sarah, the widow of one Mr. Johnston, whom he had
courted vainly before her first marriage. He brought with her some useful
additions to his household gear, and her rather useless son John Johnston.
Relatives of Abraham's mother and other old neighbours--in particular John
and Dennis Hanks--accompanied all the family's migrations. Ultimately, in
1830, they all moved further west into Illinois. Meanwhile Abraham from
an early age did such various tasks for his father or for neighbouring
farmers as from time to time suited the father. When an older lad he was
put for a while in charge of a ferry boat, and this led to the two great
adventures of his early days, voyages with a cargo boat; and two mates
down by river to New Orleans. The second and more memorable of these
voyages was just after the migration to Illinois. He returned from it to a
place called New Salem, in Illinois, some distance from his father's new
farm, in expectation of work in a store which was about to be opened.
Abraham, by this time, was of age, and in accordance with custom had
been set free to shift for himself.
Each of these migrations was effected with great labour in transportation of
baggage (sometimes in home-made boats), clearing of timber, and building;
and Thomas Lincoln cannot have been wanting in the capacity for great
exertions. But historians have been inclined to be hard on him. He seems to
have been without sustained industry; in any case he had not much money
sense and could not turn his industry to much account. Some hint that he
drank, but it is admitted that most Kentucky men drank more. There are
indications that he was a dutiful but ineffective father, chastising not too
often or too much, but generally on the wrong occasion. He was no scholar
and did not encourage his son that way; but he had a great liking for stories.
He was of a peaceable and inoffensive temper, but on great provocation
would turn on a bully with surprising and dire consequences. Old Thomas,
after Abraham was turned loose, continued a migrant, always towards a
CHAPTER I 9
supposed better farm further west, always with a mortgage on him.
Abraham, when he was a struggling professional man, helped him with
money as well as he could. We have his letter to the old man on his
death-bed, a letter of genuine but mild affection with due words of piety.
He explains that illness in his own household makes it impossible for him
to pay a last visit to his father, and then, with that curious directness which
is common in the families of the poor and has as a rule no sting, he remarks
that an interview, if it had been possible, might have given more pain than
pleasure to both. Everybody has insisted from the first how little Abraham
took after his father, but more than one of the traits attributed to Thomas
will certainly reappear.
Abraham, as a man, when for once he spoke of his mother, whom he very
seldom mentioned, spoke with intense feeling for her motherly care. "I
owe," he said, "everything that I am to her." It pleased him in this talk to
explain by inheritance from her the mental qualities which distinguished
him from the house of Lincoln, and from others of the house of Hanks. She
was, he said, the illegitimate daughter of a Virginian gentleman, whose
name he did not know, but from whom as he guessed the peculiar gifts, of
which he could not fail to be conscious, were derived.
Sarah his sister was married at Gentryville to one Mr. Grigsby. The
Grigsbys were rather great people, as people went in Gentryville. It is said
to have become fixed in the boy's mind that the Grigsbys had not treated
Sarah well; and this was the beginning of certain woes.
Sarah Bush Lincoln, his stepmother, was good to him and he to her. Above
all she encouraged him in his early studies, to which a fretful housewife
could have opposed such terrible obstacles. She lived to hope that he might
not be elected President for fear that enemies should kill him, and she lived
to have her fear fulfilled. His affectionate care over her continued to the
end. She lived latterly with her son John Johnston. Abraham's later letters
to this companion of his youth deserve to be looked up in the eight large
volumes called his Works, for it is hard to see how a man could speak or
act better to an impecunious friend who would not face his own troubles
squarely. It is sad that the "ever your affectionate brother" of the earlier
CHAPTER I 10
letters declines to "yours sincerely" in the last; but it is an honest decline of
affection, for the man had proved to be cheating his mother, and Abraham
had had to stop it.
Two of the cousinhood, Dennis Hanks, a character of comedy, and John
Hanks, the serious and steady character of the connection, deserve mention.
They and John Johnston make momentary reappearances again. Otherwise
the whole of Abraham Lincoln's kindred are now out of the story. They
have been disposed of thus hastily at the outset, not because they were
discreditable or slight people, but because Lincoln himself when he began
to find his footing in the world seems to have felt sadly that his family was
just so much to him and no more. The dearest of his recollections attached
to premature death; the next to chronic failure. Rightly or wrongly (and we
know enough about heredity now to expect any guess as to its working in a
particular case to be wrong) he attributed the best that he had inherited to a
licentious connection and a nameless progenitor. Quite early he must have
been intensely ambitious, and discovered in himself intellectual power; but
from his twelfth year to his twenty-first there was hardly a soul to
comprehend that side of him. This chill upon his memory unmistakably
influenced the particular complexion of his melancholy. Unmistakably too
he early learnt to think that he was odd, that his oddity was connected with
his strength, that he might be destined to stand alone and capable of so
standing.
The life of the farming pioneer in what was then the Far West afforded a
fair prospect of laborious independence. But at least till Lincoln was grown
up, when a time of rapid growth and change set in, it offered no hope of
quickly gotten wealth, and it imposed severe hardship on all. The country
was thickly wooded; the settler had before him at the outset heavy toil in
clearing the ground and in building some rude shelter,--a house or just a
"half-faced camp," that is, a shed with one side open to the weather such as
that in which the Lincoln family passed their first winter near Gentryville.
The site once chosen and the clearing once made, there was no such ease of
cultivation or such certain fertility as later settlers found yet further west
when the development of railways, of agricultural machinery, and of
Eastern or European markets had opened out to cultivation the enormous
CHAPTER I 11
stretches of level grass plain beyond the Mississippi.
Till population had grown a good deal, pioneer families were largely
occupied in producing for themselves with their own hands what, in their
hardy if not always frugal view, were the necessities and comforts of life.
They had no Eastern market for their produce, for railways did not begin to
be made till 1840, and it was many years before they crossed the Eastern
mountains. An occasional cargo was taken on a flat-bottomed boat down
the nearest creek, as a stream is called in America, into the Ohio and so by
the innumerable windings of the Mississippi to New Orleans; but no return
cargo could be brought up stream. Knives and axes were the most precious
objects to be gained by trade; woollen fabrics were rare in the West, when
Lincoln was born, and the white man and woman, like the red whom they
had displaced, were chiefly dressed in deer skins. The woods abounded in
game, and in the early stages of the development of the West a man could
largely support himself by his gun. The cold of every winter is there great,
and an occasional winter made itself long remembered, like the "winter of
the deep snow" in Illinois, by the havoc of its sudden onset and the
suffering of its long duration. The settling of a forest country was
accompanied here as elsewhere by the occasional ravages of strange and
destructive pestilences and the constant presence of malaria. Population
was soon thick enough for occasional gatherings, convivial or religious,
and in either case apt to be wild, but for long it was not thick enough for the
life of most settlers to be other than lonely as well as hard.
Abraham Lincoln in his teens grew very fast, and by nineteen he was nearly
six foot four. His weight was never quite proportionate to this. His ungainly
figure, with long arms and large hands and relatively small development of
chest, and the strange deep-cut lineaments of his face were perhaps the
evidence of unfit (sometimes insufficient) food in these years of growth.
But his muscular strength was great, and startling statistical tales are told of
the weight he could lift and the force of his blows with a mallet or an axe.
To a gentle and thoughtful boy with secret ambition in him such strength is
a great gift, and in such surroundings most obviously so. Lincoln as a lad
was a valuable workman at the varied tasks that came his way, without
needing that intense application to manual pursuits which the bent of his
CHAPTER I 12
mind made irksome to him. And he was a person of high consideration
among the lads of his age and company. The manners of the people then
settling in Indiana and Illinois had not the extreme ferocity for which
Kentucky had earlier been famous, and which crops up here and there in
frontier life elsewhere. All the same, as might naturally be supposed, they
shared Plato's opinion that youths and men in the prime of life should settle
their differences with their fists. Young Lincoln's few serious combats were
satisfactorily decisive, and neither they nor his friendly wrestling bouts
ended in the quarrels which were too common among his neighbours. Thus,
for all his originality and oddity, he early grew accustomed to mix in the
sort of company he was likely to meet, without either inward shrinking or
the need of conscious self-assertion.
In one thing he stood aloof from the sports of his fellows. Most
backwoodsmen were bred to the gun; he has told us that he shot a turkey
when he was eight and never afterwards shot at all. There is an early tale of
his protests against an aimless slaughter of mud turtles; and it may be
guessed that the dislike of all killing, which gave him sore trouble later,
began when he was young. Tales survive of his kindness to helpless men
and animals. It marks the real hardness of his surroundings, and their
hardening effect on many, that his exertions in saving a drunken man from
death in the snow are related with apparent surprise. Some tales of his
helping a pig stuck in a bog or a dog on an ice floe and the like seem to
indicate a curious and lasting trait. These things seem not to have been
done spontaneously, but on mature reflection after he had passed unheeding
by. He grew to be a man of prompt action in circumstances of certain kinds;
but generally his impulse was slow and not very sure. Taste and the minor
sensibilities were a little deficient in him. As a lady once candidly
explained to him, he was not ready with little gracious acts. But rare
occasions, such as can arouse a passionate sense of justice, would kindle
his slow, kind nature with a sudden fire.
The total amount of his schooling, at the several brief periods for which
there happened to have been a school accessible and facility to get to it, was
afterwards computed by himself at something under twelve months. With
this slight help distributed over the years from his eighth to his fifteenth
CHAPTER I 13
birthday he taught himself to read, write, and do sums. The stories of the
effort and painful shifts, by which great men accomplish this initial labour
almost unhelped, have in all cases the same pathos, and have a certain
sameness in detail. Having learnt to read he had the following books within
his reach: the Bible, "Aesop's Fables," "Robinson Crusoe," the "Pilgrim's
Progress," a "History of the United States," and Weems' "Life of
Washington." Later on the fancy took him to learn the laws of his State, and
he obtained the "Laws of Indiana." These books he did read, and read
again, and pondered, not with any dreamy or purely intellectual interest, but
like one who desires the weapon of learning for practical ends, and desires
also to have patterns of what life should be. As already said, his service as a
labourer could be considerable, and when something stirred his ambition to
do a task quickly his energy could be prodigious. But "bone idle is what I
called him," was the verdict long after of one, perhaps too critical,
employer. "I found him," he said, "cocked up on a haystack with a book.
'What are you reading?' I said. 'I'm not reading, I'm studying,' says he.
'What are you studying?' says I. 'Law,' says he, as proud as Cicero. 'Great
God Almighty!' said I." The boy's correction, "studying" for "reading," was
impertinent, but probably sound. To be equally sound, we must reckon
among his educational facilities the abundant stories which came his way in
a community which, however unlettered, was certainly not dull-spirited; the
occasional newspaper; the rare lectures or political meetings; the much
more frequent religious meetings, with preachers who taught a grim
doctrine, but who preached with vigour and sometimes with the deepest
sincerity; the hymns often of great emotional power over a simple
congregation--Cowper's "There is a fountain filled with blood," is one
recorded favourite among them; the songs, far other than hymns, which
Dennis Hanks and his other mates would pick up or compose; and the
practice in rhetoric and the art of exposition, which he unblushingly
afforded himself before audiences of fellow labourers who welcomed the
jest and the excuse for stopping work. The achievement of the self-taught
man remains wonderful, but, if he surmounts his difficulties at all, some of
his limitations may turn to sheer advantage. There is some advantage
merely in being driven to make the most of few books; great advantage in
having one's choice restricted by circumstances to good books; great
advantage too in the consciousness of untrained faculty which leaves a man
CHAPTER I 14
capable in mature life of deliberately undertaking mental discipline.
Along with the legends and authentic records of his self-training, signs of
an ambition which showed itself early and which was from the first a clean
and a high ambition, there are also other legends showing Lincoln as a
naughty boy among naughty boys. The selection here made from these
lacks refinement, and the reader must note that this was literally a big,
naughty boy, not a man who had grown stiff in coarseness and ill-nature.
First it must be recalled that Abraham bore a grudge against the Grigsbys,
an honourable grudge in its origin and perhaps the only grudge he ever
bore. There had arisen from this a combat, of which the details might
displease the fastidious, but which was noble in so far that Abraham
rescued a weaker combatant who was over-matched. But there ensued
something more displeasing, a series of lampoons by Abraham, in prose
and a kind of verse. These were gross and silly enough, though probably to
the taste of the public which he then addressed, but it is the sequel that
matters. In a work called "The First Chronicles of Reuben," it is related
how Reuben and Josiah, the sons of Reuben Grigsby the elder, took to
themselves wives on the same day. By local custom the bridal feast took
place and the two young couples began their married careers under the roof
of the bridegrooms' father. Moreover, it was the custom that, at a certain
stage in the celebrations, the brides should be escorted to their chambers by
hired attendants who shortly after conducted the bridegrooms thither. On
this occasion some sense of mischief afoot disturbed the heart of Mrs.
Reuben Grigsby the elder, and, hastening upstairs, just after the attendants
had returned, she cried out in a loud voice and to the great consternation of
all concerned, "Why, Reuben, you're in bed with the wrong wife!" The
historian who, to the manifest annoyance of Lincoln's other biographers,
has preserved this and much other priceless information, infers that
Abraham, who was not invited to the feast, had plotted this domestic
catastrophe and won over the attendants to his evil purpose. This is not a
certain inference, nor is it absolutely beyond doubt that the event recorded
in "The First Chronicles of Reuben" ever happened at all. What is certain is
that these Chronicles themselves, composed in what purports to be the style
of Scripture, were circulated for the joint edification of the proud race of
Grigsby and of their envious neighbours in the handwriting of Abraham
CHAPTER I 15
Lincoln, then between seventeen and eighteen. Not without reason does an
earlier manuscript of the same author conclude, after several correct
exercises in compound subtraction, with the distich:--
"Abraham Lincoln, his hand and pen, He will be good, but God knows
when."
Not to be too solemn about a tale which has here been told for the
whimsical fancy of its unseemliness and because it is probably the worst
that there is to tell, we may here look forward and face the well-known fact
that the unseemliness in talk of rough, rustic boys flavoured the great
President's conversation through life. It is well to be plain about this.
Lincoln was quite without any elegant and sentimental dissoluteness, such
as can be attractively portrayed. His life was austere and seems to have
been so from the start. He had that shy reverence for womanhood which is
sometimes acquired as easily in rough as in polished surroundings and
often quite as steadily maintained. The testimony of his early companions,
along with some fragments of the boy's feeble but sincere attempts at verse,
shows that he acquired it young. But a large part of the stories and pithy
sayings for which he was famous wherever he went, but of which when
their setting is lost it is impossible to recover the enjoyment, were
undeniably coarse, and naturally enough this fact was jarring to some of
those in America who most revered him. It should not really be hard, in any
comprehensive view of his character and the circumstances in which it
unfolded itself, to trace in this bent of his humour something not discordant
with the widening sympathy and deepening tenderness of his nature. The
words of his political associate in Illinois, Mr. Leonard Swett, afterwards
Attorney-General of the United States, may suffice. He writes: "Almost any
man, who will tell a very vulgar story, has, in a degree, a vulgar mind. But
it was not so with him; with all his purity of character and exalted morality
and sensibility, which no man can doubt, when hunting for wit he had no
ability to discriminate between the vulgar and refined substances from
which he extracted it. It was the wit he was after, the pure jewel, and he
would pick it up out of the mud or dirt just as readily as from a parlour
table." In any case his best remembered utterances of this order, when least
fit for print, were both wise and incomparably witty, and in any case they
CHAPTER I 16
did not prevent grave gentlemen, who marvelled at them rather
uncomfortably, from receiving the deep impression of what they called his
pure-mindedness.
One last recollection of Lincoln's boyhood has appealed, beyond any other,
to some of his friends as prophetic of things to come. Mention has already
been made of his two long trips down the Mississippi. With the novel
responsibilities which they threw on him, and the novel sights and company
which he met all the way to the strange, distant city of New Orleans, they
must have been great experiences. Only two incidents of them are recorded.
In the first voyage he and his mates had been disturbed at night by a band
of negro marauders and had had a sharp fight in repelling them, but in the
second voyage he met with the negro in a way that to him was more
memorable. He and the young fellows with him saw, among the sights of
New Orleans, negroes chained, maltreated, whipped and scourged; they
came in their rambles upon a slave auction where a fine mulatto girl was
being pinched and prodded and trotted up and down the room like a horse
to show how she moved, that "bidders might satisfy themselves," as the
auctioneer said, of the soundness of the article to be sold. John Johnston
and John Hanks and Abraham Lincoln saw these sights with the
unsophisticated eyes of honest country lads from a free State. In their home
circle it seems that slavery was always spoken of with horror. One of them
had a tenacious memory and a tenacious will. "Lincoln saw it," John Hanks
said long after, and other men's recollections of Lincoln's talk confirmed
him--"Lincoln saw it; his heart bled; said nothing much, was silent. I can
say, knowing it, that it was on this trip that he formed his opinion of
slavery. It ran its iron into him then and there, May, 1831. I have heard him
say so often." Perhaps in other talks old John Hanks dramatised his early
remembrances a little; he related how at the slave auction Lincoln said, "By
God, boys, let's get away from this. If ever I get a chance to hit that thing,
I'll hit it hard."
The youth, who probably did not express his indignation in these prophetic
words, was in fact chosen to deal "that thing" a blow from which it seems
unlikely to recover as a permitted institution among civilised men, and it is
certain that from this early time the thought of slavery never ceased to be
CHAPTER I 17
hateful to him. Yet it is not in the light of a crusader against this special evil
that we are to regard him. When he came back from this voyage to his new
home in Illinois he was simply a youth ambitious of an honourable part in
the life of the young country of which he was proud. We may regard, and
he himself regarded, the liberation of the slaves, which will always be
associated with his name, as a part of a larger work, the restoration of his
country to its earliest and noblest tradition, which alone gave permanence
or worth to its existence as a nation.
CHAPTER II
THE GROWTH OF THE AMERICAN NATION
1. The Formation of a National Government.
It is of course impossible to understand the life of a politician in another
country without study of its conditions and its past. In the case of America
this study is especially necessary, not only because the many points of
comparison between that country and our own are apt to conceal profound
differences of customs and institutions, but because the broader difference
between a new country and an old is in many respects more important than
we conceive. But in the case of Lincoln there is peculiar reason for carrying
such a study far back. He himself appealed unceasingly to a tradition of the
past. In tracing the causes which up to his time had tended to conjoin the
United States more closely and the cause which more recently had begun to
threaten them with disruption, we shall be examining the elements of the
problem with which it was his work in life to deal.
The "Thirteen United States of America" which in 1776 declared their
independence of Great Britain were so many distinct Colonies distributed
unevenly along 1,300 miles of the Atlantic coast. These thirteen Colonies
can easily be identified on the map when it is explained that Maine in the
extreme north was then an unsettled forest tract claimed by the Colony of
Massachusetts, that Florida in the extreme south belonged to Spain, and
that Vermont, which soon after asserted its separate existence, was a part of
the State of New York. Almost every one of these Colonies had its marked
peculiarities and its points of antagonism as against its nearest neighbours;
but they fell into three groups. We may broadly contrast the five
southernmost, which included those which were the richest and of which in
many ways the leading State was Virginia, with the four (or later six)
northernmost States known collectively as New England. Both groups had
at first been colonised by the same class, the smaller landed gentry of
England with a sprinkling of well-to-do traders, though the South received
later a larger number of poor and shiftless immigrants than the North, and
the North attracted a larger number of artisans. The physical conditions of
the South led to the growth of large farms, or "plantations" as they were
called, and of a class of large proprietors; negro slaves thrived there and
were useful in the cultivation of tobacco, indigo, rice, and later of cotton.
The North continued to be a country of small farms, but its people turned
also to fishery and to commerce, and the sea carrying trade became early its
predominant interest, yielding place later on to manufacturing industries.
The South was attached in the main, though by no means altogether, to the
Church of England; New England owed its origin to successive
immigrations of Puritans often belonging to the Congregational or
Independent body; with the honourable exception of Rhode Island these
communities showed none of the liberal and tolerant Spirit which the
Independents of the old country often developed; they manifested,
however, the frequent virtues as well as the occasional defects of the
Puritan character. The middle group of Colonies were of more mixed
origin; New York and New Jersey had been Dutch possessions, Delaware
was partly Swedish, Pennsylvania had begun as a Quaker settlement but
included many different elements; in physical and economic conditions
they resembled on the whole New England, but they lacked, some of them
conspicuously, the Puritan discipline, and had a certain cosmopolitan
character. Though there were sharp antagonisms among the northern
settlements, and the southern settlements were kept distinct by the great
distances between them, the tendency of events was to soften these minor
differences. But it greatly intensified one broad distinction which marked
off the southern group from the middle and the northern groups equally.
CHAPTER II 19
Nevertheless, before independence was thought of there were common
characteristics distinguishing Americans from English people. They are the
better worth an attempt to note them because, as a historian of America
wrote some years ago, "the typical American of 1900 is on the whole more
like his ancestor of 1775 than is the typical Englishman." In all the
Colonies alike the conditions of life encouraged personal independence. In
all alike they also encouraged a special kind of ability which may be called
practical rather than thorough--that of a workman who must be competent
at many tasks and has neither opportunity nor inducement to become
perfect at one; that of the scientific man irresistibly drawn to inventions
which shall make life less hard; that of the scholar or philosopher who must
supply the new community's need of lawyers and politicians.
On the other hand, many of the colonists' forefathers had come to their new
home with distinct aspirations for a better ordering of human life than the
old world allowed, and it has frequently been noticed that Americans from
the first have been more prone than their kinsmen in England to pay
homage to large ideal conceptions. This is a disposition not entirely
favourable to painstaking and sure-footed reform. The idealist American is
perhaps too ready to pay himself with fine words, which the subtler and
shyer Englishman avoids and rather too readily sets down as insincere in
others. Moreover, this tendency is quite consistent with the peculiar
conservatism characteristic of America. New conditions in which tradition
gave no guidance called forth great inventive powers and bred a certain
pride in novelty. An American economist has written in a sanguine humour,
"The process of transplanting removes many of the shackles of custom and
tradition which retard the progress of older countries. In a new country
things cannot be done in the old way, and therefore they are probably done
in the best way." But a new country is always apt to cling with tenacity to
those old things for which it still has use; and a remote and undeveloped
country does not fully share the continual commerce in ideas which brings
about change (and, in the main, advance) in the old world. The
conservatism which these causes tend to produce has in any case been
marked in America. Thus, as readers of Lowell are aware, in spite of the
ceaseless efflorescence of the modern slang of America, the language of
America is in many respects that of an older England than ours, and the like
CHAPTER II 20
has all along been true of important literature, and still more of oratory, in
America. Moreover, as the sentences which have just been quoted may
suggest, the maxim that has once hit the occasion, or the new practice or
expedient once necessitated by the conditions of the moment, has been
readily hallowed as expressing the wisdom of the ages. An Englishman will
quote Burke as he would quote Demosthenes or Plato, but Americans have
been apt to quote their elder statesmen as they would quote the Bible. In
like manner political practices of accidental origin--for instance, that a
representative should be an inhabitant of the place he represents--acquire in
America something like the force of constitutional law.
In this connection we must recall the period at which the earliest settlers
came from England, and the political heritage which they consequently
brought with them. This heritage included a certain aptitude for local
government, which was fostered in the south by the rise of a class of large
landowners and in the north by the Congregational Church system. It
included also a great tenacity of the subject's rights as against the State--the
spirit of Hampden refusing payment of ship-money--and a disposition to
look on the law and the Courts as the bulwarks of such rights against
Government. But it did not include--and this explains the real meaning of
the War of Independence--any sort of feeling of allegiance to a Parliament
which represented Great Britain only, and which had gained its position
even in Great Britain since the fathers of Virginia and Massachusetts left
home. Nor did it include--and this was of great importance in its influence
on the form of the Constitution--any real understanding of or any aptitude
for the English Parliamentary Government, under which the leaders of the
legislative body and the advisers of the Crown in its executive functions are
the same men, and under which the elected persons, presumed for the
moment to represent the people, are allowed for that moment an almost
unfettered supremacy.
Thus there was much that made it easy for the Colonies to combine in the
single act of repudiating British sovereignty, yet the characteristics which
may be ascribed to them in common were not such as inclined them or
fitted them to build up a great new unity.
CHAPTER II 21
The Colonies, however, backed up by the British Government with the
vigour which Chatham imparted to it, had acted together against a common
danger from the French. When the States, as we must now call them, acted
together against the British Government they did so in name as "United
States," and they shortly proceeded to draw up "Articles of Confederation
and Perpetual Union." But it was union of a feeble kind. The separate
government of each State, in its internal affairs, was easy to provide for;
representative institutions always existed, and no more change was needed
than to substitute elected officers for the Governors and Councillors
formerly appointed by the Crown. For the Union a Congress was provided
which was to represent all the States in dealings with the outside world, but
it was a Government with no effective powers except such as each separate
State might independently choose to lend it. It might wage war with
England, but it could not effectually control or regularly pay the military
service of its own citizens; it might make a treaty of peace with England,
but it could not enforce on its citizens distasteful obligations of that treaty.
Such an ill-devised machine would have worked well enough for a time, if
the Union Government could have attached to itself popular sentiments of
honour and loyalty. But the sentiments were not there; and it worked badly.
When once we were reconciled to a defeat which proved good for us, it
became a tradition among English writers to venerate the American
Revolution. Later English historians have revolted from this indiscriminate
veneration. They insist on another side of the facts: on the hopelessness of
the American cause but for the commanding genius of Washington and his
moral authority, and for the command which France and Spain obtained of
the seas; on the petty quarrelsomeness with which the rights of the
Colonists were urged, and the meanly skilful agitation which forced on the
final rupture; on the lack of sustained patriotic effort during the war; on the
base cruelty and dishonesty with which the loyal minority were persecuted
and the private rights guaranteed by the peace ignored. It does not concern
us to ascertain the precise justice in this displeasing picture; no man now
regrets the main result of the Revolution, and we know that a new country
is a new country, and that there was much in the circumstances of the war
to encourage indiscipline and ferocity. But the fact that there is cause for
such an indictment bears in two ways upon our present subject.
CHAPTER II 22
In the first place, there has been a tendency both in England and in America
to look at this history upside down. The epoch of the Revolution and the
Constitution has been regarded as a heroic age--wherein lived the elder
Brutus, Mucius Scaevola, Claelia and the rest--to be followed by almost
continuous disappointment, disillusionment and decline. A more pleasing
and more bracing view is nearer to the historic truth. The faults of a later
time were largely survivals, and the later history is largely that of growth
though in the face of terrific obstacles and many influences that favoured
decay. The nobility of the Revolution in the eighteenth century may be
rated higher or lower, but in the Civil War, in which the elder brothers of so
many men now living bore their part, the people of the North and of the
South alike displayed far more heroic qualities.
In the second place, the War of Independence and of the Revolution lacked
some of the characteristics of other national uprisings. It was not a revolt
against grievous oppression or against a wholly foreign domination, but
against a political system which the people mildly resented and which only
statesmen felt to be pernicious and found to be past cure. The cause
appealed to far-seeing political aspiration and appealed also to turbulent
and ambitious spirits and to whatever was present of a merely revolutionary
temper, but the ordinary law-abiding man who minded his own business
was not greatly moved one way or the other in his heart.
The subsequent movement which, in a few years after independence was
secured, gave the United States a national and a working Constitution was
altogether the work of a few, to which popular movement contributed
nothing. Of popular aspiration for unity there was none. Statesmen knew
that the new nation or group of nations lay helpless between pressing
dangers from abroad and its own financial difficulties. They saw clearly
that they must create a Government of the Union which could exercise
directly upon the individual American citizen an authority like that of the
Government of his own State. They did this, but with a reluctant and
half-convinced public opinion behind them.
The makers of the Constitution earned in a manner the full praise that has
ever since been bestowed on them. But they did not, as it has often been
CHAPTER II 23
suggested they did, create a sort of archetype and pattern for all
Governments that may hereafter partake of a federal character. Nor has the
curious machine which they devised--with its balanced opposition between
two legislative chambers, between the whole Legislature and the
independent executive power of the President, between the governing
power of the moment and the permanent expression of the people's will
embodied in certain almost unalterable laws--worked conspicuously better
than other political constitutions. The American Constitution owes its
peculiarities partly to the form which the State Governments had naturally
taken, and partly to sheer misunderstanding of the British Constitution, but
much more to the want at the time of any strong sense of national unity and
to the existence of a good deal of dislike to all government whatsoever. The
sufficient merit of its founders was that of patient and skilful diplomatists,
who, undeterred by difficulties, found out the most satisfactory settlement
that had a chance of being accepted by the States.
So the Colonies, which in 1776 had declared their independence of Great
Britain under the name of the United States of America, entered in 1789
into the possession of machinery of government under which their unity
and independence could be maintained.
It will be well at once to describe those features of the Constitution which it
will be necessary for us later to bear in mind. It is generally known that the
President of the United States is an elected officer--elected by what
operates, though intended to act otherwise, as a popular vote. During the
four years of his office he might roughly be said to combine the functions
of the King in this country and those of a Prime Minister whose cabinet is
in due subjection to him. But that description needs one very important
qualification. He wields, with certain slight restrictions, the whole
executive power of government, but neither he nor any of his ministers can,
like the ministers of our King, sit or speak in the Legislature, nor can he,
like our King, dissolve that Legislature. He has indeed a veto on Acts of
Congress, which can only be overridden by a large majority in both
Houses. But the executive and the legislative powers in America were
purposely so constituted as to be independent of each other to a degree
which is unknown in this country.
CHAPTER II 24
It is perhaps not very commonly understood that President and Congress
alike are as strictly fettered in their action by the Constitution as a limited
liability company is by its Memorandum of Association. This Constitution,
which defines both the form of government and certain liberties of the
subject, is not unalterable, but it can be altered only by a process which
requires both the consent of a great majority in Congress or alternatively of
a great majority of the legislatures of the distinct States composing the
Union, and also ratification of amendments by three-fourths of the several
States. Thus we shall have to notice later that a "Constitutional
Amendment" abolishing slavery became a terror of the future to many
people in the slave States, but remained all the time an impossibility in the
view of most people in the free States.
We have, above all things, to dismiss from our minds any idea that the
Legislature of a State is subordinate to the Congress of the United States, or
that a State Governor is an officer under the President. The Constitution of
the Union was the product of a half-developed sense of nationality. Under it
the State authority (in the American sense of "State") and the Union or
Federal authority go on side by side working in separate spheres, each
subject to Constitutional restrictions, but each in its own sphere supreme.
Thus the State authority is powerless to make peace or war or to impose
customs duties, for those are Federal matters. But the Union authority is
equally powerless, wherever a State authority has been constituted, to
punish ordinary crime, to promote education, or to regulate factories. In
particular, by the Constitution as it stood till after the Civil War, the Union
authority was able to prohibit the importation of slaves from abroad after
the end of 1807, but had no power to abolish slavery itself in any of the
States.
Further, Congress had to be constituted in such a manner as to be agreeable
to the smaller States which did not wish to enter into a Union in which their
influence would be swamped by their more populous neighbours. Their
interest was secured by providing that in the Senate each State should have
two members and no more, while in the House of Representatives the
people of the whole Union are represented according to population. Thus
legislation through Congress requires the concurrence of two forces which
CHAPTER II 25
may easily be opposed, that of the majority of American citizens and that of
the majority of the several States. Of the two chambers, the Senate, whose
members are elected for six years, and to secure continuity do not all retire
at the same time, became as time went on, though not at first, attractive to
statesmen of position, and acquired therefore additional influence.
Lastly, the Union was and is still the possessor of Territories not included
in any State, and in the Territories, whatever subordinate self-government
they might be allowed, the Federal authority has always been supreme and
uncontrolled in all matters. But as these Territories have become more
settled and more populated, portions of them have steadily from the first
been organised as States and admitted to the Union. It is for Congress to
settle the time of their admission and to make any conditions in regard to
their Constitutions as States. But when once admitted as States they have
thenceforward the full rights of the original States. Within all the
Territories, while they remained under its jurisdiction it lay with Congress
to determine whether slavery should be lawful or not, and, when any
portion of them was ripe for admission to the Union as a State, Congress
could insist that the new State's Constitution should or should not prohibit
slavery. When the Constitution of the Union was being settled, slavery was
the subject of most careful compromise; but in any union formed between
slave States and free, a bitter root of controversy must have remained, and
the opening through which controversy actually returned was provided by
the Territories.
On all other matters the makers of the Constitution had in the highest
temper of statesmanship found a way round seemingly insuperable
difficulties. The whole attitude of "the fathers" towards slavery is a
question of some consequence to a biographer of Lincoln, and we shall
return to it in a little while.
2. Territorial Expansion.
A machine of government had been created, and we are shortly to consider
how it was got to work. But the large dominion to be governed had to be
settled, and its area was about to undergo an enormous expansion. It will be
CHAPTER II 26
convenient at this point to mark the stages of this development.
The thirteen Colonies had, when they first revolted, definite western
boundaries, the westernmost of them reaching back from the sea-board to a
frontier in the Alleghany Mountains. But at the close of the war Great
Britain ceded to the United States the whole of the inland country up to the
Mississippi River. Virginia had in the meantime effectively colonised
Kentucky to the west of her, and for a time this was treated as within her
borders. In a similar way Tennessee had been settled from North and South
Carolina and was treated as part of the former. Virginia had also established
claims by conquest north of the Ohio River in what was called the
North-West Territory, but these claims and all similar claims of particular
States in unsettled or half-settled territory were shortly before or shortly
after the adoption of the Constitution ceded to the Union Government. But
the dominions of that Government soon received a vast accession. In 1803,
by a brave exercise of the Constitutional powers which he was otherwise
disposed to restrict jealously, President Jefferson bought from Napoleon I.
the great expanse of country west of the Mississippi called Louisiana. This
region in the extreme south was no wider than the present State of
Louisiana, but further north it widened out so as to take in the whole
watershed of the Missouri and its tributaries, including in the extreme north
nearly all the present State of Montana. In 1819 Florida was purchased
from Spain, and that country at the same time abandoned its claims to a
strip of coastland which now forms the sea-board of Alabama and
Mississippi.
Such was the extent of the United States when Lincoln began his political
life. In the movement of population by which this domain was being settled
up, different streams may be roughly distinguished. First, there was from
1780 onwards a constant movement of the poorer class and of younger sons
of rich men from the great State of Virginia and to some extent from the
Carolinas into Kentucky and Tennessee, whence they often shifted further
north into Indiana and Illinois, or sometimes further west into Missouri. It
was mainly a movement of single families or groups of families of
adventurous pioneers, very sturdy, and very turbulent. Then there came the
expansion of the great plantation interest in the further South, carrying with
CHAPTER II 27
it as it spread, not occasional slaves as in Kentucky and Tennessee, but the
whole plantation system. This movement went not only directly westward,
but still more by the Gulf of Mexico and up the Mississippi, into the State
of Louisiana, where a considerable French population had settled, the State
of Mississippi, and later into Missouri. Later still came the westward
movement from the Northern States. The energies of the people in these
States had at first been to great extent absorbed by sea-going pursuits and
the subjugation of their own rugged soil, so that they reached western
regions like Illinois rather later than did the settlers from States further
south. Ultimately, as their manufactures grew, immigration from Europe
began its steady flow to these States, and the great westward stream, which
continuing in our days has filled up the rich lands of the far North-West,
grew in volume. But want of natural timber and other causes hindered the
development of the fertile prairie soil in the regions beyond the upper
Mississippi, till the period of railway development, which began about
1840, was far advanced. Illinois was Far West in 1830, Iowa and Minnesota
continued to be so in 1860. The Northerners, when they began to move
westward, came in comparatively large numbers, bringing comparatively
ordered habits and the full machinery of outward civilisation with them.
Thus a great social change followed upon their arrival in the regions to
which only scattered pioneers such as the Lincolns had previously
penetrated. In Illinois, with which so much of our story is bound up, the
rapidity of that change may be estimated from the fact that the population
of that State multiplied sevenfold between the time when Lincoln settled
there and the day when he left it as President.
The concluding stages by which the dominions of the United States came to
be as we know them were: the annexation by agreement in 1846 of the
Republic of Texas, which had separated itself from Mexico and which
claimed besides the great State of Texas a considerable territory reaching
north-west to the upper portions of the Arkansas River; the apportionment
to the Union by a delimitation treaty with Great Britain in 1846 of the
Oregon Territory, including roughly the State of that name and the rest of
the basin of the Columbia River up to the present frontier--British
Columbia being at the same time apportioned to Great Britain; the conquest
from Mexico in 1848 of California and a vast mountainous tract at the back
of it; the purchase from Mexico of a small frontier strip in 1853; and the
acquisition at several later times of various outlying dependencies which
will in no way concern us.
3. The Growth of the Practice and Traditions of the Union Government.
We must turn back to the internal growth of the new united nation. When
the Constitution had been formed and the question of its acceptance by the
States had been at last settled, and when Washington had been inaugurated
as the first President under it, a wholly new conflict arose between two
parties, led by two Ministers in the President's Cabinet, Alexander
Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson. Both were potent and remarkable men,
Hamilton in all senses a great man. These two men, for all their
antagonism, did services to their country, without which the vigorous
growth of the new nation would not have been possible.
The figure of Alexander Hamilton, then Secretary of the Treasury (ranked
by Talleyrand with Fox and Napoleon as one of the three great men he had
known), must fascinate any English student of the period. If his name is not
celebrated in the same way in the country which he so eminently served, it
is perhaps because in his ideas, as in his origin, he was not strictly
American. As a boy, half Scotch, half French Huguenot, from the English
West Indian island of Nevis, he had been at school in New York when his
speeches had some real effect in attaching that city to the cause of
Independence. He had served brilliantly in the war, on Washington's staff
and with his regiment. He had chivalrously defended, as an advocate and in
other ways, the Englishmen and loyalists against whose cause he fought.
He had induced the great central State of New York to accept the
Constitution, when the strongest local party would have rejected it and
made the Union impossible. As Washington's Secretary of the Treasury he
organised the machinery of government, helped his chief to preserve a
strong, upright and cautious foreign policy at the critical point of the young
Republic's infancy, and performed perhaps the greatest and most difficult
service of all in setting the disordered finances of the country upon a sound
footing. In early middle age he ended a life, not flawless but admirable and
lovable, in a duel, murderously forced upon him by one Aaron Burr. This
CHAPTER II 29
man, who was an elegant profligate, with many graces but no public
principle, was a claimant to the Presidency in opposition to Hamilton's
greatest opponent, Jefferson; Hamilton knowingly incurred a feud which
must at the best have been dangerous to him, by unhesitatingly throwing his
weight upon the side of Jefferson, his own ungenerous rival. The details of
his policy do not concern us, but the United States could hardly have
endured for many years without the passionate sense of the need of
government and the genius for actual administration with which Hamilton
set the new nation on its way. Nevertheless--so do gifts differ--the general
spirit which has on the whole informed the American nation and held it
together was neither respected nor understood by him. His party, called the
Federalists, because they claimed to stand for a strong and an efficient
Federal Government, did not survive him long. It is of interest to us here
only because, with its early disappearance, there ceased for ever to be in
America any party whatsoever which in any sense represented aristocratic
principles or leanings.
The fate of Jefferson's party (at first called Republican but by no means to
be confused with the Republican party which will concern us later) was far
different, for the Democratic party, represented by the President of the
United States at this moment, claims to descend from it in unbroken
apostolic succession. But we need not pause to trace the connecting thread
between them, real as it is, for parties are not to be regarded as individuals.
Indeed the personality of Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of State in
Washington's Cabinet, impressed itself, during his life and long after, upon
all America more than that of any other man. Democrats to-day have
described Lincoln, who by no means belonged to their party, as Jefferson's
spiritual heir; and Lincoln would have welcomed the description.
No biographer has achieved an understanding presentment of Jefferson's
curious character, which as presented by unfriendly critics is an unpleasing
combination of contrasting elements. A tall and active fellow, a good
horseman and a good shot, living through seven years of civil war, which
he had himself heralded in, without the inclination to strike a blow; a
scholar, musician, and mathematician, without delicacy, elevation, or
precision of thought or language; a man of intense ambition, without either
CHAPTER II 30
administrative capacity or the courage to assert himself in counsel or in
debate; a dealer in philanthropic sentiment, privately malignant and
vindictive. This is not as a whole a credible portrait; it cannot stand for the
man as his friends knew him; but there is evidence for each feature of it,
and it remains impossible for a foreigner to think of Jefferson and not
compare him to his disadvantage with the antagonist whom he eclipsed. By
pertinacious industry, however, working chiefly through private
correspondence, he constructed a great party, dominated a nation, and
dominated it mainly for good. For the rapid and complete triumph of
Jefferson's party over its opponents signifies a very definite and lasting
conversion of the main stream of American public opinion to what may be
called the sane element in the principles of the French Revolution. At the
time when he set himself to counterwork Hamilton, American
statesmanship was likely to be directed only to making Government strong
and to ensuring the stability of the business world; for reaction against the
bloody absurdities that had happened in France was strong in America, and
in English thought, which still had influence in America, it was
all-powerful. Against this he asserted an intense belief in the value of
freedom, in the equal claim of men of all conditions to the consideration of
government, and in the supreme importance to government of the
consenting mind of the governed. And he made this sense so definitely a
part of the national stock of ideas that, while the older-established
principles of strong and sound government were not lost to sight, they were
consciously rated as subordinate to the principles of liberty.
It must not be supposed that the ascendency thus early acquired by what
may be called liberal opinions in America was a matter merely of setting
some fine phrases in circulation, or of adopting, as was early done in most
States, a wide franchise and other external marks of democracy. We may
dwell a little longer on the unusual but curiously popular figure of
Jefferson, for it illustrates the spirit with which the commonwealth became
imbued under his leadership. He has sometimes been presented as a man of
flabby character whose historical part was that of intermediary between
impracticable French "philosophes" and the ruffians and swindlers that
Martin Chuzzlewit encountered, who were all "children of liberty," and
whose "boastful answer to the Despot and the Tyrant was that their bright